it's an outerspace today's briefing from
Downing Street I'll start with an update
on the progress we're making to beat the
virus before moving to an update on
schools the first slide shows the latest
covert alert level pack Ovid 19 alert
level across the United Kingdom has
moved down from level 4 to level 3
as recommended by the joint biosecurity
Center for chief medical officers for
England Scotland Wales and Northern
Ireland have reviewed the evidence and
agree with this recommendation in all
four nations there's been a continuing
steady decrease in cases but this
doesn't mean that the pandemic is over
the virus is still in general
circulation and localized outbreaks are
likely to occur the second slide shows
cases confirmed with a test 7 million
430 3114 test for corona virus have now
been carried out or posted out in the
United Kingdom this includes a hundred
and sixty nine thousand six hundred
tests carried out or posted out
yesterday three hundred and 1815 people
have tested positive an increase of 1346
cases since yesterday saij has confirmed
today that their estimate for VR rates
for the United Kingdom is unchanged on
last week at nought point seven to
naught point nine we want to keep the
our number below one our is the average
number of additional people infected by
each infected person the third slide
shows the latest data from hospitals 494
people were admitted to hospital with
corona virus in England Wales and
Northern Ireland on the 16th of June
down from five
thirty-four a week earlier and down from
a peak of 3432 on the 1st of April 354
coronavirus patients are currently in
mechanical ventilation beds in the
United Kingdom down from 392 a week ago
and down from a peak of 3301 on the 12th
of April the fourth slide shows what is
happening in hospitals right across the
country there are now five thousand and
thirty people in hospital with
coronavirus in the UK down 10% from 5608
a week ago and down from a peak of 20000
699 on the 12th of April as we graft
show while there is some variation most
nations and regions of the United
Kingdom are broadly following a similar
pattern the fifth slide shows the daily
figures of those who sadly lost their
lives after testing positive for
coronavirus across all settings for
total number of deaths now stands at 42
thousand 461 that's an increase of 173
fatalities since yesterday when measured
on a seven-day rolling average the daily
number of deaths currently stands at 140
down from a peak of 943 on the 14th of
April turning to schools in March when
we asked schools to close we did
something different from virtually every
other nation we made the decision to
keep schools open not just for the
children of critical workers but also
for those most vulnerable children in
our society this was because we
recognized the important role that
schools play in keeping those children
safe
from the start of this month schools
began to welcome back children from
nursery reception year 1 and year 6 as
part of a phased and cautious return and
from this week we started to sieve
return of years 10 and 12 we want as
many children back in school as possible
which is why this week we announced more
flexibility for primary schools so that
they can have the opportunity to bring
back more of their pupils if they're
able to do so in line with the
protective measures that we've already
set out today with the overwhelming
majority of primary and secondary
schools as well as colleges and
nurseries opening to more children and
young people I wanted to take the
opportunity again to say thank you thank
you to all the teachers childcare and
support staff who've done so much and
continue to do so much to welcome back
our children in a warm friendly
environment where they have the
opportunity to learn I think all of us
who've seen our children return to
school know that they're enjoying being
back in the classroom and being with
their friends and their classmates
school is vital for every one of our
children that is why we will bring all
children in all year groups back to
school in September while many children
have already returned to school I do
understand there is anxiety still among
parents I want to assure you that the
well-being of your children is the
absolute top priority for every single
one of us we have put robust protective
measures in place including a hierarchy
of controls and protective bubbles and
more stress that is in every child's
best interest to return to school if
they're eligible to and able to this
measured return is part of our roadmap
it's part of how we will recover
and rebuild after this virus but I think
all of us recognize how much children
have missed out and why it's so
important we support them to catch up on
this lost ground having opened schools
to more pupils and set out our intention
for a full return in September the next
part of our recovery will be to roll out
a hugely ambitious catch-up plan for all
of our children we must get them back to
where they should be and put in place a
secure foundation for longer-term reform
will not allow an entire generation to
lose out on their education or accept
lower expectations for them that's why
we're launching a 1 billion pound kovat
catch-up plan they'll lift outcomes for
all pupils with targeted support for
those from disadvantaged backgrounds who
are most at risk of falling behind
because of this disruption as part of
this package we'll provide a universal
catch-up premium worth 650 million
pounds for all state school children in
England to help them make up for the
lost teaching time in the next academic
year the education endowment foundation
has published a guide for schools on how
the money could be best spent which will
include invent intervention programs
access to technology or summer schools
this crisis will have affected children
in many different ways
and for this reason I am giving schools
of a discretion to tailor this funding
towards their particular needs and the
needs of the children that they teach
the plan also includes a new 350 million
pound national tutoring program to
increase access to high quality tuition
for disadvantaged children and young
people this will not only help children
in the short term or create a positive
long lasting legacy to drive up
standards
expanding the number of high quality
tutoring providers for all schools to
use this 1 billion pound package is
already on top of fourteen point four
billion pound deal over three years
announced last year going to our schools
recognizing there's our schools need
additional support at this difficult
time and helping them help students to
catch up over the coming weeks we'll
publish further information and guidance
to help schools prepare prepare for a
full return in September we're working
across government and with a sector to
ensure these plans are fully in place so
that this can happen and every child of
every year group has the benefit of a
first-class education the pandemic has
dealt an unprecedented shock to our
education system as it has to many other
parts of our national life although we
have a clear plan there will of course
be times when we have to respond quickly
to changing circumstances it provide
this virus has taught us one thing it's
the absolute importance of being
flexible and adaptable when we have to
be the education system has shown that
it can do this and do so much more we
all want to see every child back in
school and we'll work together to make
sure that we achieve this now on
questions if we can first of all turn to
Louise from stoke-on-trent the
mid-nineteen swab test is uncomfortable
and difficult to conduct with children
this will become a major problem when
winter virus season starts what is the
government going to do to make testing
an easier less intimidating process for
children well Louise you raise an
incredibly important point now I know
that sort of that having two children
myself it's something that you do as a
parent worried about an awful lot and
that's why the government is taking
steps to make
sure we get better testing for all
children especially as we approach for
winter months next if we can turn to
Bryn from North a litter and Bryn asks
when will the government in England make
its new advice for shielding available
so there's employers and business can
support those who are shielding back
into sharp sambar workplace in a way
that they will feel safe Bryn I know
this is incredibly important and having
family myself that are currently
shielding for worry that they have and
the confidence and the reassurance they
want in order to be able to take those
steps outsides incredibly incredibly
important to every one of them and
that's why in the coming weeks very
shortly we'll be getting that advice out
to them giving them the guidance they
need to make sure that they know that
they can go out safely and who is
needing to continue to take those
special protective measures next if we
can move to Bronwyn Jeffries from for
BBC a good afternoon plan we the Prime
Minister today has said that by
September all pupils will be back in
schools like this full-time how are you
going to do that when there is still any
social distancing and when the
government published the alert levels it
said that when we reached alert level
three social distancing would be relaxed
so is the two meter rule going to be
relaxed
well Bronwyn you and I both have a great
passion to see all children returning to
school as soon as possible we know how
much school our children benefit from
being in school we know how vital it is
to get them back into the classroom
learning being with their teachers and
being with their friends and what we're
seeing with this pandemic we're seeing
with this pandemic you know the
infection levels decreasing we're seeing
the number of people who have affected
with this virus continuously declining
and the levels reducing
this is all incredibly positive and
means that we can look at bringing and
making sure every child returns to
school and we recognize there's still
going to be have to be protective
measures put in place to make sure that
children are safe and make sure that
teachers and all those who work in
school are safe as well and that's why
we're going to be issuing further
guidance in the next two weeks but in
terms of the review of distance the
Prime Minister has made it clear that
this review is currently being
undertaken is going to be a short period
of time and it will be reporting back to
the Prime Minister and the cabinet for
cabinet to make a decision but I'm
afraid we're not in a position I'm not
in a position today to give you an exact
date schools have said that even if you
went to one meter it still wouldn't
allow them to get all pupils back every
day of the week Bronwyn as as you well
know that we've been creating bubbles of
children in the classroom creating a
protective environment for those
children currently that is at fifteen
what we would be looking at doing is
expanding those bubbles to include the
whole class but for relaxation of social
distancing is incredibly important not
just for schools but for the whole
economy we've got to get Britain working
again we've got to get people back into
their workplaces we've already seen a
relaxation of so so much the opportunity
for people to go into non-food retail
the opportunity for people to gather in
small groups this is all positive
progress but we're looking at how we
make sure we create the safest
environment possible for school children
and we've had schools open all the way
through this period catering for the
children of critical workers catering
for those vulnerable children we've seen
a massive expansion in the number of
children going into schools and this has
been done carefully and cautiously and
it's been done safely and
credibly successfully as well if we can
next turn - Liz Bates from Channel 4
News Liz so so just just to follow up on
Brandon's question actually again on the
2 meter social distancing thing when we
speak to teachers they're really
desperate to hear these things as soon
as possible that northern islands
already done it it seems like it's
coming down the line don't you just say
it now why are we waiting well Liz we've
already been very clear that we want to
see all children in all classes
returning full-time to school in
September that's what we're working
towards and we're actually much further
ahead than Northern Ireland not just in
terms of critical workers children's and
vulnerable children and all children
being able to come to school
we're a head of Northern Ireland because
nursery school children are able to come
back reception school children are able
to come back yeah one year six year 10
and year 12 so we've much further ahead
the Northern Ireland but this is why
we've said clearly that we're going to
be publishing for further guidance
within the next two weeks so that
schools have a maximum amount of time to
prepare for the next phase of welcoming
children back we think it's important
but we also think it's important to use
the next two weeks to work continue to
work with the sector to consult with the
sector of how we make sure this works in
the most successful way possible Liz so
on this cash that's been announced today
early years and colleges are now
excluded from it when we spoke to
colleges they think that they were led
to believe that they would be part that
they would get some of this money so why
have they been cut out at the last
minute well what we see and you've
probably seen it yourself our hungry
little mind scheme which is a great
scheme to really encourage the early
educational development for those early
years children we want to look at diff
ways of how we can continue to support
that sector how we can help parents but
most importantly how we can help
children and then we move to be Fe
scepter we're going to continue to work
really closely with the fe sector to see
how we can continue to add on be
additional and extra support
we know that they're looking towards and
we want to help them in terms of able to
support their students in order to
continue to succeed if next we move to
Sam coats from Sky Sam secretary of
state I'm confused with what the
government's proposing and promising
today so Boris Johnson said quite
clearly that from September he wanted
all children back everyday without fail
but I'm not entirely clear that that's
what you're committing to have you
signed up to that pledge in fall that
all states still school children will be
able to go in every day every week not
on rotation and is this now government
policy yes or no and how much of a plan
do you have to get there is one option
actually getting rid of social
distancing altogether or are you going
to plan to spend the summer helping
schools get new buildings and recruit
new teachers for classrooms that are not
yet built because unless you do one or
the other then the prime minister's
suggestion isn't going to be fulfilled
today and the second thing private
schools from the start of lockdown have
been able to do interactive video
lessons on Microsoft teams or on zoom
you know teachers looking kids in the
eye but this hasn't been possible in
almost any state school why on earth not
shouldn't it be isn't failing to get
proper interactive teaching at home the
biggest black mark of your department
during lockdown well Sam I'm very sorry
that you're so confused and and to be
absolutely clear absolutely signed up to
the fact that we want to bring every
child back in every year group in every
school so I hope that is as much clarity
and as I did just say a little bit
earlier that we're over the next two
weeks we want to consult closely River
sector
before we issue our guidance now plans
wider across secondary schools across
primary schools across all settings and
Fe colleges as well and you highlight a
important issue a really important issue
about children and their ability to
learn while they're being in lockdown I
want to see every child you know get the
very most from their teachers as I know
every teacher does and we've seen some
amazing efforts and some amazing work if
I look at the oak national academy that
we set up in record time that's
delivering lessons for every single year
group across every single subject range
not just in GCSE level in secondary
schools but at primary schools and early
years as well and just over the last few
weeks over 12 million lessons have been
downloaded and I was hoping that you are
going to even welcome the fact that
we've made over a hundred million pound
investment in terms of laptops which
we're rolling out to some of those
children hooves from the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable backgrounds
and making sure that they have internet
access but we see the ability to support
their learning is not just over the last
few weeks and over the next few weeks
but a long term project and that's why
we've launched for kovat catch-up plan
to help children not just over the next
few weeks not just over the summer but
over the next year supporting them to
learn and the other initiative that we
took up and I am sorry that Skye didn't
have the opportunity to report on it but
we made available to every single school
in England
Microsoft teams and Google classroom
just like you highlighted that many
private schools have had so there's
every school is able to match what the
very best private schools are able to do
because I don't want any child who is in
the state sector suffering or falling
behind
anyone else and that is why we're
spending a billion pounds supporting
children to catch up supporting them to
learn and Sam would you and what
proportion of state schools are actually
doing interactive video learning on
things like Microsoft teams my
understanding is that it's incredibly
low and isn't that a problem well we've
seen every school around the country
delivering amazing support for children
sometimes as has been through Microsoft
teams and and through Google in other
ways it's making sure that resources go
to the children at their home is through
teachers contacting those children and
but this is a bigger effort that we're
making it's a billion pound effort that
we're investing in schools and we're
looking at some of those children from
the most disadvantaged backgrounds
because actually a lot of the evidence
points to the fact that those are the
children we need to be most worried
about that they may have fallen for
furthest behind and that's why we're
introducing introducing this tutoring
program and all the evidence points to
the fact that this tutoring program can
deliver the biggest benefit for those
children have the biggest impact on
their life chances and it's certainly
something that I hope that we've seen
right across for sector so many people
welcome it because they were Lucy Fisher
from were to change the curriculum to
ensure this well Lucy as I'm sure you're
aware are nationally important
incredibly important that when children
are learning about our nation's history
they learn all aspects of it both for
good and the bad but we mustn't forget
there's in this nation we are incredible
we have an incredibly rich history and
we should be incredibly proud of our
history because time and time and time
again this country has made a difference
and change things for the better right
around the world and we should as a
nation be proud of that history and
teach our children about it Lucy did you
like to follow up he's just just two
quick things and
firstly do you think that there is more
that needs to be done in schools to
tackle racism and if so what and
secondly on you mentioned the the
government's new funding for tutoring
charities and have welcomed this and
called for it to extend beyond the
coronavirus crisis so I wanted to ask
you whether you would potentially
support making personal tutoring for the
poorest children a permanent initiative
to drive up standards so tolerance and
respect have to be and I believe are at
the cornerstone of absolutely everything
that this country does and teaches in
all of our schools in all of our
colleges and in all of our universities
and that's how it should be and that is
what I want to see everyone teaching in
schools right across the United Kingdom
and in England we've taken the approach
of a personal tutoring because we
recognize that the all the evidence
points to the fact that this can make
the biggest single difference to
children's lives via evidence seems to
point to the fact that if their child
has 12 weeks of this personal tutoring
for just two hours a week it can deliver
up to five months worth of catch-up for
those children from the most
disadvantaged communities and what we're
looking at is how this works how this
impact really really changes the
educational outcomes of children we're
very confident it will make a big big
difference and this is why that we've
focused on these efforts and we'll be
looking at how we support schools
whether through the use of their pupil
premium as to how we can continue to
build on evidence-based initiatives that
deliver brilliant outcomes for our young
people next if we can turn to Martin
Brown from the Express Martin hello
will your plan for schools have a plan
in place
of what to do if there is a second wave
of coronavirus infections in the autumn
or in the winter Martin while we move to
the position of making sure that every
school is ready to be welcoming that
children of all ages right across the
spectrum into the classroom we always
have to make sure that we have proper
thoughtful and careful consideration for
every single eventualities and I think
that's the right and proper way of doing
it and can I just ask an ellipse
could I just ask another question please
and just on summer holidays what
countries would you like to see the UK
have airbridges with and are you
concerned that one of the countries that
has been mooted as a possible country we
could have an air bridge with Portugal
is seeing an some spikes in coronavirus
cases well as someone who grew up in
Scarborough my personal view is as
everyone if they have the opportunity
can have a great benefits and great
advantage of visiting some beautiful
seaside resorts right around the UK and
frankly you can't get better than
visiting places right across England
Wales Scotland and Northern Ireland and
I hope people will take up that
opportunity during the summer but the
Secretary of State for Transport
continues to have discussions with his
counterparts on this and will report
back when he's in a position to do so
and finally if we can turn to Aimee
Gibbons from The Times education support
you education secretary do you agree
with the Prime Minister that it is
crucial that teachers draw up Capshaw
plans every pupil before the summer
the Prime Minister and myself are in
complete agreement we need to be doing
everything that we can do to support
children who have suffered as a result
of not being in school and we're asking
we're asking all schools
even if her pupils are not attending
school to be getting in touch with those
children trying to encourage and invite
them into school so they can have some
face-to-face time understand their
learning needs and actually give them
the support to be able to catch up and
be in the best possible position to be
able to benefit from a world-class
education that would be receiving within
the classroom in September
Amy would you like another question yes
please and can I please ask do you want
teachers to work this summer to help
their pupils catch up well we we've
already set out and there's some
brilliant work by V education endowment
foundation about how teachers and
schools can support their pupils one of
those packages that we're putting a you
know we're putting a billion pounds
behind this catch-up plan covet capture
plan so it's a big investment of an
awful lot of money one of those schemes
is to have children coming back during
the summer into schools but we recognize
it's really important for the schools to
be able to tailor their plan for their
children to make sure it delivers the
maximum impact so those children catch
up and really succeed thank you ever so
much Jamie I just like to thank you all
for joining me in today's daily briefing
thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News